Progress to date

1. Please give details of the work you have undertaken in the last year, focussing on the progress you have made.

I focus on the issue of defining and modelling trust in the abstract, as well as leveraging this understanding to develop frameworks in two distinct areas: Decentralised e-commerce and off-chain payment channels.

More precisely, I attempt to model interactions between buyers and sellers using the Universal Composability cryptographic framework. I have built a suitable model and I am in the process of formalising its desired properties. A crucial component is the mechanism through which a potential customer chooses a trustworthy vendor. My master thesis proposed a mechanism through which such a component can be built, known as "Trust is Risk". The marketplace framework is currently being refined in order to both fit our intuition on how a real-world marketplace behaves and to accommodate the use of "Trust is Risk" for deciding which vendor to trust. Ultimately we would like to formally argue on whether "Trust is Risk" can be used as a robust and dependable mechanism for choosing trustworthy vendors and if so why. We hope that a more formal definition of an idealised marketplace will arise in the process, which in turn may facilitate the design of provably robust and trustworthy mechanisms for decentralised e-commerce.

My second project is describing payment channels formally. Payment channels are the general term used for one of the approaches that help resolve the scalability issue of blockchains. More specifically, two parties can "lock" some funds with one transaction on the blockchain, then pay each other an unlimited number of times using these funds without touching the blockchain and finally they can release their funds at any time, either cooperatively or unilaterally, by publishing one more transaction on the blockchain. Both parties are assured to receive their rightful funds as shown in the latest state of the channel before closing it, thus no trust between the parties is needed. Many off-chain transactions can take place with only two on-chain transactions. In essence, as long as the parties cooperate they do not have to publish every transaction; if one party misbehaves, the other can use the blockchain as a fair "judge" that can resolve the issue to the favor of the honest party dependably and automatically.

Most of the progress in this area has been a thorough literature review, in an attempt to understand the underlying tools and primitives that enable this construction, as well as the various challenges that arise and the solutions to them. I have observed that there exists no common vocabulary, nor a unified understanding of the issues and related tradeoffs. I have started to develop a model that tries to cover payment channels in a generic way. I am currently formalising and refining the model. My next step will be to express as many existing payment channel instantiations as possible through the developed model and continue its refinement until it can describe as many instantiations as possible.

2. Please outline approximately how often you met with your supervisor over the last year, and whether these meetings were one-to-one or within a group. Detail the impact that these meetings have had on your academic work/thinking and whether you are satisfied with the support received.

Over the last year I have been meeting Prof. Kiayias one-to-one semi-regularly, especially during the first and the last months of the year. Initially we held several meetings in order to get to know each other better, to pinpoint my targets and to assemble a rough reading list. In November we set up a regular weekly half-hour meeting which has not been observed - we unfortunately skipped several weeks. Apart from two video calls, all the meetings have been in person. These meetings have been of immense value to me, since clarifying and debating cryptographic concepts with someone who has a clear understanding helped demystify them much quicker and with less misconceptions than otherwise. Of course, my work would have been in a much more embryonic state, without structure and coherence if not for these meetings. My only complaint is that I would appreciate having more and/or lengthier meetings since I have often found myself in a situation where a 5-minute chat would have solved an issue I had spent a week on - then again I assume that every PhD student would want more time, no matter how much time their supervisor already invests.

Furthermore, a weekly two-hour Security and Cryptography group meeting is held. In this meeting every member of the group reflects briefly on their progress and listens to comments from the rest of the group. These meetings have not greatly helped me in my narrow research targets, but have vastly improved my understanding of how research is done in general and acquainted me with many cryptographic and blockchain-related tools and concepts. I have learned to scrutinize my ideas more carefully and thoroughly.

Last but not least, I have had two meetings and several short chats with Dr. Kousha throughout the year, especially during the spring semester. These meetings and chats concerned graph theory and game theory questions. They helped me clarify some misconceptions, better grasp concepts and their implications and understand which papers are more relevant to my work. We have planned one more meeting in the first week of June.

3. Please give details of any conferences, seminars, workshops or regular events that you are currently attending in support of your PhD studies.

I attended the Real World Crypto conference in Zurich, Switzerland during 10-12/1/2018. https://rwc.iacr.org/2018/

I attend the weekly Lattices workshop organised by members of the cryptosec group and led by Thomas Kerber with the help of Thomas Zacharias. By now we understand of the mechanics of lattices and the main results. We now focus on hard problems and the cryptographic applications they enable.

This academic year I attended three courses: Introduction to Modern Cryptography, Blockchains and Distributed Ledgers, Algorithmic Game Theory and Applications. In the first two I was fully matriculated and examined, in the third I submitted the coursework but did not sit the exam; I will instead submit a report on the implementation of Trust is Risk once it is ready.

Lastly, here is a list of the most relevant talks and lectures I attended throughout the year:
Strange bedfellows: What do quantum mechanics, Google search, number theory and tertiary admissions rankings have in common? - Aidan Sims (27/6/2017)
Talk by Yvo Desmedt on foundations of Cryptography (24/7/2017)
ICOs and moral hazards - Charles Hoskinson, Blockchain: Reflections on the Revolution - Susan Ramonat, Proving the Security of Blockchain Protocols: From Proof of Work to Proof of Stake - Aggelos Kiayias (27/7/2017)
Usor Economicus - Modelling Search Interaction using Economics - Leif Azzopardi (22/9/2017)
PrivApprox - Pramod Bhatotia (25/9/2017)
Reachability for Branching Concurrent Stochastic Games - Kousha Etessami (6/2/2018)
Building Secure Software - Sean Kornish (28/3/2018)
Machine Learning for scientific inferences: Debunking the hype - David Dunson (28/5/2018)

4. Please document any academic or related achievements you have attained in the past year. Examples of these include prizes, conferences attended / applied to, publications, grants awarded, patents applied for or awarded and transferable skills acquired.

I published and presented my master thesis "Trust is Risk" with my co-author Dionysis Zindros in Financial Cryptography and Data Security 2017 Conference in Malta (http://fc17.ifca.ai/preproceedings/paper_37.pdf) on 4/4/2017.

I did a short (5') presentation on "Trust is Risk" as part of Explorathon 2017 - Curiosity Forest (http://www.explorathon.co.uk/edinburgh/explorathon-curiosity-forest) in Charteris Centre, Edinburgh on 29/9/2017.

I presented "Trust is Risk" in ECESCON 10 in Xanthi, Greece (http://sfhmmy.gr/files/ProceedingsEcescon10.pdf, p. 48) on 27/10/2018.

I attended the 17/5/2018 VOX workshop "Stand and Deliver", which helped me improve my abilities in presenting to an audience.

I have vastly improved my programming abilities and especially my knowledge of JavaScript due to my side-project of implementing the mechanism of my master thesis. This work can be found here: https://github.com/orfeaslitos/trustisrisk.js/tree/spv-implementation

5. Please note here any career development activities you have participated in during the last year for your subject area or elsewhere in the University beyond your own research.Examples of these activities include being a teaching assistant, lecturing, tutoring, being a lab demonstrator or marking.

During the winter semester of the current academic year I served as tutor and teaching assistant for the Computer Security course. I focussed on the cryptographic topics of the course, presenting the basics of Cryptography in 15-student groups in tutorials and building (with bash) and supporting a practical workshop on using gpg keys.

Plan of action

1. What are your goals for the year ahead in relation to your thesis?

2. Give a rough plan for achieving these goals, identifying any areas that you believe could present challenges. If you are in second year or beyond, please give a rough plan for completing your thesis.


